Surely, you must have come across something
like this.
Some Whatsapp forward or the other, must have
told you about how Amazon has no stores, Uber
has no cars, all the way to Netflix is not
a TV broadcast channel, how are they making
so much money… how are they so popular,
this new economy is simply amazing… they
must have told you.
We saw "has no", "has no", "has no", but - they
only seem to talk about what is not there,
but they don't talk about what it is, who
they are,… What ARE they? They are software
companies.
There is a message there for us. A warning
fo us to keep in mind. Let us watch on!
Namaste!
Ozhukkamudaimai - Is there any moral control?
Yes, there could be LEGAL controls. But what
about MORAL controls? Quite some time ago,
on a Quotidian, in Quotidian-061, we contrasted
Newton's Laws with Asimov's Laws. One is the
way the universe works. They have spelt it
out that this is how the world shall operate,
and nobody can violate them. The other is
a request. Please do it like this, requests
Asimov, when advising people who are keen
on designing intelligent robots. In the future,
may robots be designed with these constraints.
Assume you were planning to start learning
martial arts today, would you go to this Kill
Bill Guy? Pai Mei is his name… He would
teach you the Five Point Palm Heart Exploding
Technique.. All about killing a person before
he can take five steps on a level surface.
Or… Will you go to this teacher? Mister
Miyagi. The Sensei who becomes very famous
in The Karate Kid. Today, he is once again
in the news because of a program called Cobra
Kai. He is back in action, even though he
is dead. Would you learn from him, instead?
The most important lesson from Miyagi was,
Keep Away From Evil. The best defence is "No
Be There"! Don't get into that fight in the
first place. That was the best defence he
taught. Who would you learn from?
Okay, if you are a software engineer, doing
code in your corner of the world, are you
now thinking how does it really affect the
world? About twenty years ago, Marc Andreessen
wrote a very important article, I think it
appeared about fifteen years ago… He talked
about how software was going to eat the world.
He said, like we saw in the opening part about
Netflix and Amazon and Uber, about the coming
future, he picturised it beautifully and he
even predicted. Software will play a role
in almost everything that you see around you.
Now, with the advent of SaaS companies, software
has become a service, and like electricity,
like water, it is now available on tap. Which
means, "on tap", a software engineer somewhere
in Australia, or probably in Europe, can affect
the way you interact with other things and
other people around you… In one tap!
Proof for how famous that concept is? Well,
it almost became a meme. "Software is eating
the world" became… look at the word play,
look at the number of different articles that
have come up around that single sentence.
Software is eating the world.
There was this movie "Terminator 3". The third
episode in the Terminator Series. In that
movie, there is a scene where Armageddon is
unleashed. In other words, complete utter
destruction. The whole world is destroyed.
Watch that scene.
By some quirk, this is what happens. Everybody
launches missiles against everybody else.
There is a huge destruction. Devastation all
over the globe. When you see this, if you
are a software engineer, you should get this
thought. The question is not "Which idiot
pressed the button"… Rather, the more pertinent
question is, "With the press of a button,
something launched so many rockets simultaneously…
Who wrote the software for that?? With perfect
guidance, controlled by GPS, with near-perfect
accuracy, not an inch to the left or right,
the bomb that got dropped… Who wrote that
code??" That should be your question. Is it
ethical? Yes, you are an employee, bound to
an employer, who is asking you to write such
code, so you write it?? Don't you ask a question
back? Don't you have a moral obligation to
clarify? "Sir, you are proposing that we destroy
the world. (We are also in the same world,
aren't we?)"
Look at these photographs. Each of them features
one President of the United States. From the
time of President Eisenhower and Ronald Reagan,
till Obama, and even Trump… If you notice,
next to each President, there is one guy.
Holding on to a black suitcase. It is called
"The Nuclear Football". What on earth does
a nuclear football really mean? Well, it looks
like a football. And it basically contains
the nuclear launch codes. Wherever he is,
even if he is inside a remote toilet deep
inside Africa, if the time has come, the moment
it is evident that the world is going to end
because somebody has dropped a bomb on us,
"What? Have we been bombed? Well, let us retaliate
and pay them back! Let us do tit for tat."…
was the crazy line of thought and he is supposed
to, or she is supposed to if there is a US
female president, insert those codes, and
launch nuclear armageddon.
Just open the suitcase, authenticate yourself,
probably iris authentication, launch the nuclear
weapon. Again. Software and hardware. Written
by somebody. Calling this as immoral, underlining
this as too much power in the hands of a single
person, a person by named Fisher promoted
something called The Fisher Protocol. He recommended
that this nuclear football thing should be
replaced by a Fisher Protocol. He said, yes,
let there be a person along with the President
all the time, but that person should be an
innocent cadet, newly joined in the Navy or
the Air Force, and he should be a volunteer,
who should have an implant embedded into his
or her heart. A small capsule sewn and embedded
close to that person's heart. The nuclear
codes should be available only inside that
capsule. So, this guy will just roam around,
along with the President, carrying just a
knife. A sharp knife. In the pocket, like
a security guard. The moment the President
wants to launch… No problem! Just ask for
the knife, take it… puncture this person's
heart, take that little capsule, insert the
code, and launch nuclear armageddon! The President
was shell-shocked. How can I kill a person
in cold blood? Do you understand now, sir?
If you launch Nuclear Armageddon, a billion
or more innocent people will die, don't you
realise? Just because you are far removed
from them, just because there is an abstraction,
will what you do be justified? Kill this person.
Is he not just another innocent victim? Sample
a single person from among the billion you
are going to kill anyway! If you still continue
to feel that you have to go ahead with this,
for the "Greater Good", go ahead, do it! It
wasn't implemented, unfortunately. But…
I thought it was a very beautiful deterrent.
In user interface design, there is this thing
called Dark Patterns. We started by asking
"How is this fair? Is there no moral code??"
and went all the way to Nuclear Armageddon.
But, every day, like the bite of a mosquito,
we are suffering from it a thousand times,
because of interfaces like these.
We think something is free. But, there is
a small print that says Shipping Extra.
We are asked to download something, but four
out of the five buttons that lead to a download
actually lead elsewhere, to malware. The download
button is actually… there!
There are many more dark patterns, actually.
Have you seen this guy, in Hindustan Times?
Do you want to allow notifications? Or…
Allow notifications later?? There is no way
you can escape notifications, it would seem.
There is no option. Do it now, or later, my
friend. But do it!
It gets even worse. These days, this circus
with the cookies… Accept and Close - is
all you get, in some places. There is no option
to say "I don't want to accept"! Dark patterns!
Many smart minds have debated this thought.
This person is ex-Google. Tristan Harris is
his name. He appears in The Social Dilemma.
A beautiful documentary on Netflix. About
how these social media networks are actually
ending up controlling us. The word "control"
might sound simple and straightforward. But,
he asks, "Do you really know what happens
when they "control"?" and gives us four sentences
to mull over.
You watch what they stream. You buy what they
sell. You believe what they show. You execute
what they expect. That is what is meant by
control, he says. How to get away from this,
what is happening now… Once upon a time,
people were worried that there would be a
robot revolution soon, and they would actually
replace human capability, and overtake human
strength… but wait, they have already started
exploiting human weakness, don't you realise,
says Tristan Harris.
Dark patterns. Many smart minds have actually
worked their whole lives, wanting to actually
control you. An interesting tidbit, we have
observed in an earlier Quotidian too… Mark
Zuckerberg's child, Steve Job's daughter,
Bill Gates' son… None of these products
actually need any marketing. Just get your
kids lined up, and let them say, "I propose
that you install it on your device. I am using
it. You are going to love it too!". Just one
ad. Let them feature there. We need nothing
else. No other promotion. Like asking them
to "stab the volunteer with the capsule in
the heart". Can you get this one person to
promote it? They are famous for banning iPads,
banning social media for their children. Why?
If you wouldn't do it for your own child,
why are you going ahead and doing it for the
world around you?
My wife makes a killer Cheese Masala Dosa.
And, the way she finds out whether she has
done a really good job, is she observes us.
My son and I, when we consume the dosas while
watching Netflix, do we pause and exclaim,
"Radha, it is so good!", or do we give any
other feedback, is the way she finds out what
she should do next to make it even better.
Great. User feedback. Observation.
But, guess what Facebook said? This is exactly
what I did too… Not too long ago, Facebook
conducted an experiment across the world…
on about seven lakh people. It started showing
only cute babies. Only nice, cosy, beautiful,
amazing, happy, emotions, to one person. And
to the other person, the other half of the
seven lakh people, poverty, violence, struggling,
suffering, pain, sorrow, kind of overpopulated
their field, removed all the good ones from
that feed. They have complete control over
the program, over the algorithm, after all.
It is fully in their hands. And, they observed,
for fifteen days, how these people reacted.
How was the emotional quotient of the ones
who received the Happy Feed? How did THEY
make THEIR posts? What was their MOOD? And,
how about the ones who were shown the negative
violence and poverty feed? How did THEY react?
This was measured. Without telling them! Without
TELLING them! Fully bound legally. In Facebook's
terms and conditions, it has been made abundantly
clear. Experiments will be conducted. We will
observe the data we collect. We will use it
for our improvement. But, is it moral? How
far is it removed from what my wife did with
her cheese dosa? If that was moral and legal,
is this also moral and legal?
And, now the logo resembles an infinity symbol!
Something that encompasses everything.. They
have called themselves a universe. Metaverse,
it seems! I think it is meta-worse!
When you look into the IEEE standards, there
is a page we rarely visit. I bumped into it
only last night. There is a software engineer
code of ethics.
In that, Part 1 says "Public". Respect them.
Uphold their interests primarily.
Part 2 says "Client and Employer". Respect
them. Do what they ask you to do. As long
as, the Part 1 is not violated.
So, looking back, all the examples we saw,
from the Cheese Dosa to Nuclear Armageddon,
with great power comes great responsibility - SpiderMan
doesn't repeat it ad nauseum, for no reason!
We have a moral obligation to the people around
us. Software is eating the world. We have
to be extremely careful.
Thiruvalluvar, in his 138th Kural, says thus:-
Nandrikku Vitthaagum Nallozhukkam Theeyuzhukkam
Endrum Idumbai Tharum.
Always, it will lead only to pain and sorrow - to
have bad manners, and to be without ethics.
But good manners, they will be good seeds
for the future, he says. My point though is,
Thiruvalluvar says "Theeyozhukkam Endrum Idumbai
Tharum"… actually, the problem today is
"Theeyozhukkum" seems to give you good things.
And then, later, towards the end, shows you
its true colours. So, it has become worse
now. Long ago, during his times, it might
have been pretty straightforward, and perhaps
good behaviour yielded good results, and evil
behaviour led you to bad results. Today though,
good behaviour yields good results, while
evil behaviour ACTS as if it is giving you
EVEN BETTER results, and makes it really bad
with the final rub. Take care. Thank you!